---
layout: post
title: "Reconfigurable Battery Based EV Powertrain Explained"
category: 
  - project
---

{{ page.title }}
================

<p class="meta">10 Jan 2025 - Durham</p>

<em>This is copied from one of my discarded work, I got too cynical about EV industry and we have re-write the whole thing. It won't be a competent publishing material, however, I can always put shit on my blog. More pictures/images demonstration might be uploaded once the interests of conflict are cleared.</em>

## Background
Over the past decades, the correlation between global warming and carbon emission has become undeniable \cite{budget2023global}. As humanity and other life forms face critical environmental challenges, establishing a zero-carbon economy is both essential and urgent. Transportation, a major yet still growing contributor to emissions \cite{EIA2023}, must undergo rapid transformation to curb climate changes. Vehicle electrification is a crucial step \cite{zhang2020role, holland2021environmental, tan2023factors, jones2018future}. 

Over the last decade, electric vehicle (EV) demands have skyrocketed \cite{IEA2024}. In 2024, China, Europe, and the USA led the market, selling 10.1 million, 3.4 million, and 1.7 million EVs, respectively. This rapid growth highlights a significant shift in consumer preferences and a growing commitment to sustainable transportation.

Electric vehicles integrate cutting-edge advancements across multiple engineering disciplines. At their core, electric motors deliver instant torque and smooth acceleration \cite{sieklucki2018investigation, thomas2020modeling, wang2020challenges}. The battery pack, typically composed of advanced lithium-ion cells \cite{brandl2012batteries, saw2016integration, arora2016review}, stores the energy for long journeys. The powertrain manages energy of the whole vehicle and plays a key role in overall performance and efficiency \cite{karamuk2019review, robles2022role}.

The EV powertrain industry, like any other, faces a persistent challenge: balancing performance and cost. For an EV powertrain, performance mainly encompasses efficiency and power. The costs behind these metrics, instead, are complex and span across various fields.

Semiconductors, particularly the wide-bandgap devices such as silicon carbide (SiC) transistors \cite{1021560, robles2022role}, account for the first cost challenge nowadays. Although SiC products offer a higher power and voltage endurance than silicon devices, their cost-effectiveness is lower. Figure \ref{fig:cost_comparison_sic_vs_si} collected most avaible MOSFET products on the market, categorized them into SiC and silicon, and compared their cost-effectiveness as dollar per volt-ampere. Silicon devices exhibit a lower average and a better consistency. This observation suggests that for the same power capability, silicon devices are cheaper than SiC ones. Further, when talking about varying or various material suppliers, the price for silicon devices is significantly more predictable than SiC.

The second cost contributor is different auxiliary circuits to perform various functionalities in an EV. Figure \ref{fig:ev_circuit_structure_state} shows the structure of a mainstream EV powertrain. Beyond the motor inverter, several auxiliary circuits are necessary, including the battery management system (BMS) \cite{brandl2012batteries, chen2019review}, a dc-dc converter to supply low-voltage power for onboard appliances \cite{hasan2011features, wang2023review}, and an on-board charger \cite{khaligh2019global}. Materials and design process of these circuits adds to the overall powertrain cost.

Another cost concern arises from the variety of vehicles and generations an EV manufacturer must support. Consumer demands for electric vehicles differ based on usage, which leads to variations in vehicle types such as sedans, SUVs, and trucks. While most EV makers are eager to set their feet on all these categories, each product line requires a complete redesign of the electrical system, which means necessary labors, factory costs, and a long R\&D process. Moreover, the rapid evolution of EV presents another challenge. For instance, the transition of powertrain bus voltage from 400 V to 800 V could significantly transform the whole industry \cite{aghabali2020800, jung2017power}. To stay competitive, most car models will need to overhaul their entire circuit designs to match the new bus standards. Worse yet, such transitions necessitate the use of SiC, which remains underdeveloped and expensive.

We propose a novel EV powertrain solution -- a modular circuit built with reconfigurable battery units (RBU). Besides simplifying the manufacturing, the modular design can break down the voltage and power into smaller scales for each module, thus able to avoid the use of SiC products. This circuit can also perform aforementioned in-car functions such as charging and battery management without additional electronics. Further, this powertrain solution offers great flexibility and scalability -- we can build another product line or even next generation vehicles with minimized efforts.

## Proposal of Reconfigurable Battery Unit Based Powertrain Solution
We illustrate the core working principles of the proposed powertrain solution as follows.

### Mainstream Powertrain Structure

- Motor Driving Inverter \cite{reimers2019automotive, anwar2019traction, patzak2014design}: This is the most powerful circuit in the powertrain -- their transient power can reach hundreds of kilowatts. This inverter converts dc energy from the high-voltage battery pack into ac form to drive the motor. The number of phases varies depending on the vehicle and motor type -- e.g., three phases for sedans and six or nine for trucks.
- -Down dc-dc Converter \cite{hasan2011features, wang2023review}: With battery pack voltage typically at 400 or 800 V, auxiliary systems and in-car appliances, such as lighting and air conditioning, require significantly lower operating voltage (typically 12--48 V). This necessitates a high-ratio step-down dc-dc converter to fetch energy from the battery pack.
- Onboard Charger (OBC) \cite{yuan2021review, khaligh2019global, rivera2022charging}: Despite advancements in (super) fast-charging technologies, nearly 80\% of EVs are still charging at home \cite{DOE2024}. An onboard charger, essentially a single-phase ac-dc step-up converter, is necessary for most EVs. A typical OBC consists of two stages: a rectifier with power factor correction (PFC) function and an isolated step-up dc-dc circuit. 
- Battery Management System (BMS) \cite{brandl2012batteries}: A battery pack consists of numerous cells. The BMS ensures uniform charge distribution across these cells to optimize their lifespan and performance.
\end{itemize}

These circuits contribute to the complexity and cost of the powertrain system, particularly in terms of wide-bandgap semiconductor materials. Motor inverters are increasingly adopting SiC transistors for higher power and efficiency \cite{zhu2018high, kim2016impact}. Meanwhile, auxiliary converters demand lightweight and high efficiencies. Consequently, Gallium Nitride (GaN) transistors are also under tremendous demands due to their high switching rates \cite{su2017design, kasper2022next, su2018comparison, naradhipa2020power}.

### Reconfigurable Battery Unit Based Powertrain Solution

We propose a highly integrated modular powertrain solution, where power electronics consists solely of uniform reconfigurable battery units (RBUs). Each RBU integrates four half bridges and a battery cell to form an independently controlled bidirectional dc-ac converter. A set number of RBUs are cascaded to make a branch for each motor phase. The circuit can be scaled through adjusting the number of RBUs to meet different voltage and power requirements.

As illustrated in Figure \ref{fig:ev_circuit_structure_this}, in addition to a motor driving inverter, this system serves all other power conversion needs with the same electronics, including ac and dc charging, and low-voltage dc power directly from a single module. 

Further advantages are unlocked with the structure of individual RBUs -- the cascaded double H-bridge (CH2B) topology \cite{goetz2014modular}. Unlike other conventional modular multilevel circuits, the CH2B topology enables both series and parallel connections between modules. Figure \ref{fig:principle_ch2b} presents the structure and working principles of the CH2B-based RBUs. Each module consists of four half-bridges and one energy storage unit. Four terminals connect the module to two other ones. Each connection supports six patterns: bypass, series, and parallel modes, each with bipolar operation, as depicted in Figure \ref{fig:principle_ch2b} (b1-b6). In the bypass and series modes, modules are excluded and inserted into the output loop, respectively. In the parallel mode, transistors interconnect the battery cells of adjacent modules. These paralleled modules form a new one with combined capacitance and battery capacity. Meanwhile, when paralleled, modules' energy is redistributed to balance their state of charge. 

While the invention of CH2B topology introduced parallel connections between modules for the first time, there are variations invented to reduce the quantity of transistors \cite{zhang2024direction, fang2021review, fang2020multilevel}.

This powertrain solution offers several key advantages.

### Material: Stepping Out of SiC Hallucination

"Silicon limit", referring to the tradeoff between on-resistance and blocking voltage of silicon transistors \cite{datta1998silicon}, is the main reason SiC is rapidly replacing silicon in EV designs. Silicon transistors, particularly unipolar devices like MOSFETs, exhibit high resistance for high voltage design due to their thick blocking layer. As a result, power loss and thermal stress may become unmanageable. Theoretically, SiC can reduce the resistance by two orders of magnitude, making it a preferred choice for high-voltage applications.

However, the silicon industry has been developed for over 70 years and silicon products are indeed refined to their theoretical performance. In contrast, the SiC industry has not yet reached the same level of maturity. While SiC offers a theoretically superior performance, its practical application does not always live up to the hype, as shown in Figure \ref{fig:cost_comparison_sic_vs_si}. Meanwhile, SiC production capacity remains significantly lower than that of silicon and often causes a material shortage in EV manufacturing, which really hurts -- in EV industry, the line must never stop to make profit. Such shortage in turn strengthens the monopoly of larger EV manufacturers, as smaller players struggle to secure materials. While material industries continue working to improve SiC performance and manufacturing capacity, the global obsession of using SiC in every EV must be tempered.

Our proposed powertrain design divides high voltage into smaller units to mitigate the silicon limit challenge. Rather than being directly tied to $V_{bus}^2$, the systematic on-resistance now scales with $V_{bus}^2 / N$. This approach improves the efficiency and simplifies thermal management. 

### Versatility: No Need for Auxiliary Circuits
The proposed powertrain circuit can perform different auxiliary power conversion needs.

Battery management system (BMS) balances the state of charge between battery cells. Mainstream BMS solutions rely on dedicated circuits and can be implemented by two approaches -- passive and active, which balance battery energy through resistive loss or inductive switching, respectively. While active balancing is more efficient, it increases the hardware complexity and cost. As the proposed powertrain circuit allows parallel connection between modules, we can actively balance their state of charge (SoC) without extra circuits, as shown in figure \ref{fig:intrinsic_bms}. Since the parallel mode allows bidirectional energy flow, which allows any module to exchange their energy with neighboring modules. Latest research further suggests using proper magnetics to improve the current dynamics during the parallel mode \cite{zhang2024analytical}.

This solution also benefits battery lifespan with a milder loading profile. Batteries age faster with their loading fluctuation \cite{che2023battery}. Since modules can be in parallel with others to form a collective module, their load fluctuation is shrunk from jumping between zero and 100\% to a fraction of full load, depending on the number of modules in parallel. Figure \ref{fig:battery_load_fluctuation} demonstrates an example with two modules. The parallel connectivity smoothes the load change in both battery cells significantly. Therefore, batteries have a longer lifespan with the proposed powertrain solution.

### Effortless Auxiliary Power Supply
The proposed powertrain provides an effortless low-voltage power supply. As shown in figure \ref{fig:ev_circuit_structure_this}, the battery voltage of a single module is accessible to auxiliary appliances. Other cells can transfer energy to this cell through the parallel mode to maintain its charge state.

### High-Resolution Output
Modular circuits offer a high output resolution. Compared with a single bridge structure where the output fluctuates between two or three levels, the modular powertrain provides a multi-level output. This feature shift harmonics to a significantly higher spectrum, thus switching rates of transistors can be reduced significantly.

Meanwhile, this multi-level feature also benefits the circuit when set to charging mode. A primary effort for designing on-board chargers is to reduce the size and weight of magnetics in PFC circuits \cite{9640592}, which is usually achieved by boosting the switching rates. When this multi-cell powertrain is switched to ac charging mode, as in Figure \ref{fig:charging_options_implementation}, the multi-level output exhibits significantly lower distortion than using a single bridge circuit. Therefore, the magnetics can be minimized without fast-switching transistors.

As shown in Figure \ref{fig:ev_electronics_cost_state}, we can break down the cost of a typical EV powertrain to several key parts, including battery packs, motors, transmission system, inverters, onboard chargers, BMS system, and others \cite{PowertrainInternational2022}. While the other cost segments be maintained equal or lower than the mainstream solution, our powertrain solution cuts budgets on board charger, BMS, and high-ratio dc-dc converters. Further, the materials required by this powertrain structure consist of only silicon semiconductors. Therefore, besides the lower price, we also enjoy a better supply chain safety.

This powertrain solution provides great scalability and extendability. Different scales of powertrain can be built with the same RBU design. Adaptation to different vehicle bodies, such as from sedans to trucks, can be finished with the same RBU by extending output phases. Further, transition to a higher dc bus voltage standard can be easily done by cascading more RBUs to each phase. All aforementioned features, such as BMS, multimode charger, work without redesigning hardware.
